README.md, before:

# FastAPI Library

This is a sample project called FastAPI Library. It showcases the implementation of a library management system using the FastAPI framework.

## Getting Started

To run the project, follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Smigy32/fastapi-library.git
```

2. Navigate to the project directory:

```bash
cd fastapi-library
```

3. Modify the environment variables:

   - Rename the `.env.example` file to `.env`.
   - Open the `.env` file and update the values with your database credentials.

4. Start the application using Docker Compose:

```bash
docker-compose up
```

5. Once the containers are up and running, open a new terminal or command prompt.

6. Enter the Docker container:

```bash
docker exec -it <api container id>  bash
```

7. Inside the container, run the database migrations:

```bash
alembic upgrade head
```

8. After the migrations are applied, you can start using the API.

9. Open your web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:8000/docs` to access the Swagger UI and explore the API endpoints.

## API Endpoints

The following endpoints are available in the API:

- `POST /signup`: User registration
- `POST /login`: User Login

> **NOTE**: once you're logged in you'll get 2 tokens. In order to be able to access the routes bellow, pass the access_token as a value to the **Authentication** header with your request

- `GET /users`: Get a list of all users. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `GET /users/{user_id}`: Get details of a specific user by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `POST /users`: Create a new user. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `PUT /users/{user_id}`: Update an existing user by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `DELETE /users/{user_id}`: Delete a user by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>

- `GET /books`: Get a list of all books.
- `GET /books/{book_id}`: Get details of a specific book by ID.
- `POST /books`: Create a new book. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `PUT /books/{book_id}`: Update an existing book by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `DELETE /books/{book_id}`: Delete a book by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `GET /books/pdf/`: Get a PDF catalog of all books.

- `GET /authors`: Get a list of all authors.
- `GET /authors/{author_id}`: Get details of a specific author by ID.
- `POST /authors`: Create a new author. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `PUT /authors/{author_id}`: Update an existing author by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `DELETE /authors/{author_id}`: Delete an author by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>

## Setting up work with mail

To use email sending (welcome email and email with books catalog) you need to configure the SMTP server.
You can use any mail provider that supports the feature e.g. GMAIL, Outlook.  
To configure the mail settings just set the following env variables to your **.env** file:

- MAIL_USERNAME - your username on an email service
- MAIL_PASSWORD - your password (some services, like GMAIL, may generate a separate password specially for your app, so look it up)
- MAIL_FROM - email address that is used as a sender
- MAIL_PORT - port that your SMTP uses for connection (may vary depending on what encryption scheme you use)
- MAIL_SERVER - outgoing server address e.g. smtp.gmail.com



## Testing

To test the API run the following commands

```bash
docker exec -it <api container id>  bash
```

```bash
pytest tests/
```

Commit message:

Add info about becoming an admin and give names to each container

README.md, after:

# FastAPI Library

This is a sample project called FastAPI Library. It showcases the implementation of a library management system using the FastAPI framework.

## Getting Started

To run the project, follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Smigy32/fastapi-library.git
```

2. Navigate to the project directory:

```bash
cd fastapi-library
```

3. Modify the environment variables:

   - Rename the `.env.example` file to `.env`.
   - Open the `.env` file and update the values with your database credentials.

4. Start the application using Docker Compose:

```bash
docker-compose up
```

5. Once the containers are up and running, open a new terminal or command prompt.

6. Enter the Docker container:

```bash
docker exec -it api bash
```

7. Inside the container, run the database migrations:

```bash
alembic upgrade head
```

8. After the migrations are applied, you can start using the API.

9. Open your web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:8000/docs` to access the Swagger UI and explore the API endpoints.

## API Endpoints

The following endpoints are available in the API:

- `POST /signup`: User registration
- `POST /login`: User Login

> **NOTE**: once you're logged in you'll get 2 tokens. In order to be able to access the routes bellow, pass the access_token as a value to the **Authentication** header with your request:
**Authentication: Bearer < token >**

- `GET /users`: Get a list of all users. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `GET /users/{user_id}`: Get details of a specific user by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `POST /users`: Create a new user. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `PUT /users/{user_id}`: Update an existing user by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `DELETE /users/{user_id}`: Delete a user by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>

- `GET /books`: Get a list of all books.
- `GET /books/{book_id}`: Get details of a specific book by ID.
- `POST /books`: Create a new book. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `PUT /books/{book_id}`: Update an existing book by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `DELETE /books/{book_id}`: Delete a book by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `GET /books/pdf/`: Get a PDF catalog of all books.

- `GET /authors`: Get a list of all authors.
- `GET /authors/{author_id}`: Get details of a specific author by ID.
- `POST /authors`: Create a new author. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `PUT /authors/{author_id}`: Update an existing author by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>
- `DELETE /authors/{author_id}`: Delete an author by ID. <span style="color:yellow">*Admin only*</span>

To become an **admin** you should complete the following steps:

1. Enter the db container

   ```bash
   docker exec -it db bash
   ```

2. Connect to your main database

   ```bash
   psql -U <db user> <db name>
   ```

3. Execute the command, using the login of a user you want to make an admin

   ```bash
   UPDATE users SET is_admin = True WHERE login = '<login>';
   ```

## Setting up work with mail

To use email sending (welcome email and email with books catalog) you need to configure the SMTP server.
You can use any mail provider that supports the feature e.g. GMAIL, Outlook.  
To configure the mail settings just set the following env variables to your **.env** file:

- MAIL_USERNAME - your username on an email service
- MAIL_PASSWORD - your password (some services, like GMAIL, may generate a separate password specially for your app, so look it up)
- MAIL_FROM - email address that is used as a sender
- MAIL_PORT - port that your SMTP uses for connection (may vary depending on what encryption scheme you use)
- MAIL_SERVER - outgoing server address e.g. smtp.gmail.com

## Testing

To test the API run the following commands

```bash
docker exec -it api bash
```

```bash
pytest tests/
```
